I believe you left William & Mary in 46 then? That's
correct and I went from there first to back to East
Central State College. Taught there about
nine weeks, summer term only. There I went to
University of Oklahoma. I think probably my
contacts while I was there and before, and my
contacts in the Texas Academy, Oklahoma Academy
in the early days, put me in line for a job with them,
and I hadn't anymore, and hit Oklahoma again, and
Dr. Richards, head of the Department of Biology,
offered me a job, so, and I took it. What was that
job? I was limnologist for the biological survey,
University of Oklahoma Biological Survey. I did a
little teaching in the LD rank of full professor in
zoology. You say you did a little teaching. Does
that imply you did primarily research? Yes, it was
almost all research in limnology.
My correct limnology is the study of the seashore?
No, it's the equivalent of that, but it means the
study of aquatic, freshwater aquatic plants. And
I studied lakes and rivers and ponds and what have
you all over the state. It's a beautiful town. But
you only stayed there for one year? Yes, that's
correct.
Dr. Hopkins was responsible for tearing loose
from over there. This Project 9 thing had reared
its head and he was put in charge of it and he had to
have someone to take over the field work in
Louisiana
where the study was to be made. and
I didn't really care much about going to
Louisiana, living down
in the Boone docks, but they made it worth my while
financially, and the University of Oklahoma
didn't seem to be very much interested in keeping
me. this job. I took a leave of absence
to go, I remained with the University of Oklahoma
while I was in
Louisiana working on this Project 9. Had the
research work already started when you... Yes,
Dr. Hopkins had organized part of the elements of
it, and the personnel
problems were being taken care of by Dr. Doak, who
was head of the Department of Biology before I got
there. So I came in
probably two or three months or more after the
project had been set up by Dr. Hopkins. but they
still had no one to run the field work in Louisiana.
And I know I've heard about Project 9. Would you
tell us what the purpose of this research project
was? what the project was about? Yes, what was
Project 9 all about? The Project 9 was occasioned
by, I think, a concatenation of circumstances.
Primarily, along in 1946 and 7, oystermen
began to sue the oil companies. Now the reason for
this suit was that a previous suit against Texaco,
which had been tried about ten years prior to that,
in the mid-thirties, had been here in the courts
all of this time, and it was a pollution suit
against Texaco. Then the state Supreme Court
reversed the original ruling, which had been in
favor of Texaco, the district court. As soon as
this reversal became known, the Oysterman fell
all over themselves to join the bandwagon and sue
the oil companies, which they did. The oil
companies, Texaco leading, organized to
have the whole business studied as closely as
possible and as extensively as possible and set up
project nine. What was the claim of the oystermen?
You said there was a claim for pollution. It was
purely a pollution claim that the oysters were
dying because of toxic effects of oil. That was
their claim, exactly. The claims amounted to
somewhere around $32 million. I added this up
myself. I have copies of all of the petitions, and I
added them up, and that's what they came to. That
was lots of money in those days. Still is today, in
fact. Still is.
The man who really organized all of this business
and ramrodded it was Dr. Jack, head of the Research
Foundation. I assume that you know about that? Not
a whole lot, no. I knew that he had headed the
Research Foundation initially.
He was the man who really ramrodded the whole
business. A dynamic sort of a man. An
engineer. and one of the best of the engineer
researchers. His field was bridges. I've seen his
bibliography on suspension bridges. He was a
very fine man to work for and with and he took a great
deal of interest in all of everything that went on.
was over in Louisiana, poking his nose into
everything, and generally seeing to it that it
ran. Really a job that Dr. Jackula was not fitted
for,
and I think put him under a great mental strain all
of the time. because he was a researcher and he
would prefer to sit in some back office and do his
bridge work rather than what he was doing, but he
nevertheless did a tremendously good job. So the
oil companies led by Texaco then came to Texas A&M
and asked... Yes, all of them excepting one that
were involved and that one was Gulf Oil Company.
carried their own investigations separately.
And we have a man on the faculty who worked with them
at the same time. This is Dr. Sammy Ray at the
laboratory at Galveston. And of course Sammy and I
got to know each other at that time. So their
question to, their request to A&M was to
investigate the cause of the death of the Western.
That's right. It was simply to take into
consideration every possible cause that could be
considered. That's the way we started out. I think
we eliminated oil before we eliminated anything
else. It was the easiest one of all of them, but it
was less than a year before I knew that disease was
the cause.
To make a long story short, that's the way it came
out. There were actually three investigations of
that
of the mortalities of oysters in Louisiana. One of
them was by Gulf.
Maybe I should say four, because Freeport
Sufferer was also accused of all of these things,
as well as the oil companies. They set up a study,
and the state of Louisiana set up a study. The state
of Louisiana chose a man conveniently for
me and for Dr. Hopkins because they chose a man with
whom we had worked together at the Virginia
Fisheries Laboratory, Dr. Malcolm Owen. Dr. Owen
had gone from Virginia Fisheries to South
Carolina, I believe, and then the state of
Louisiana hired him to investigate the same
mortalities that we were investigating.
Gulf Oil Company carried on their investigation,
and Fleet Force Suffolk carried on theirs,
Project 9, all separately. Three-fourths sulfur
has never released any data about their
investigations. They did not investigate
disease or anything except in whether or not
sulfur was the cause.
The other three came to the same conclusion. All
three of us arrived at exactly the same conclusion
that disease was the factor. and when the original
description of the disease came out, this
description was a joint paper by the heads of the
three groups. Dr. Rowan, Mr. Collier, now at
Florida State, and Project Nine.
How
long a term project was this? I mean, how long did it
take to determine this? The Project 9 project, I
was in it for two and a half years, from the middle of
1947 to 1950,
January 1950. It was in January of 1950 that Dr.
Jacula talked me into coming to the faculty. Prior
to that, I was with the Research Foundation only.
and then he talked me into joining the newly
developed Department of Oceanography, which he
was the man who really envisioned this and put it
together. The same man that
put together the Project 9. Now when Project 9
ended,
I guess December the 31st, 1950. Then the oil
companies began another project, which was 23,
and I was ahead of that, reduced my staff down to a
small number of people. I had maybe five or six at
most, and this is all I needed. because by that time
we knew what was not killing oysters and where to
put our efforts and I didn't want these, I didn't
want the huge development of that project to start
with. I was against that part of it. We spent
several millions of dollars and The whole
project, if they had turned it over to Dr. Hopkins
and me and two or three others, we could have done
the whole job for a tenth of what they spent.
Maybe your answer wouldn't have been convincing
if you hadn't spent a lot of money on it. We were
accused of hiring all of the experts in the United
States on our side. This was by the oyster mission.
Yeah, of course.
Project 9 was a great project and it was a
revelation to me because I had never been paid
money, big money, except for the university job I
had and that was just a salary for doing research
and doing it the way I wanted to. That's where they
spoiled me. Project 9 you mean? Yeah. What was
Project 23? Project 23 was mainly a project which
changed its direction. First, we were continuing
studies in these diseases.
We had described this disease, but we didn't
really know very much about it, excepting that we
did know that it killed oysters, like nobody's
business.
But the rest of the story, the biological end of it,
is far from
being brought to a sufficient close.
we had that problem to finish up. The other
problem, it was a sort of a general problem which
had to do with the examination of the operations of
the oil companies as a whole, and we pretty
abruptly dropped most of the oil studies in that,
but there are so many others, such as the effects of
the dredging of canals and the marshlands, an
immense number of other things of this sort. So, we
took over these investigations. That's what we
did for about 10 years. Simply What it amounted to,
the oil companies let me spend as much time as I
wanted to on my parasitological problem. Then I
helped them solve their problems in other ways.
The problem of the effect of their operations on
the biota and the environment. Incidentally, on
people and other things. Did you ever track down
the source of the disease in the oysters? The
source? The organism? Oh yes, since that time I
have discovered a half a dozen of other diseases of
oysters and have worked with many many people
including the federal government
In fact, I set up the first laboratory for the
federal government to help them set it up and
taught their basic personnel how to go about
studying disease problems at laboratories at
Oxford and Maryland. I took a leave of absence from
Texas A&M about in 63, I believe, and spent a summer
over there just getting them straightened out so
that they could go. So this later project, While
every once in a while this oil pollution problem
would rear its head, and I continued to study it, it
was nothing like the primary thing.
The primary thing was mechanical operations of
the oil companies. This meant structures,
dredging, all of these things. I took nearly two
years just to study the dredging problem alone.
So you, I believe you said you were involved with
Project 23 for about 10 years? Yes, up until 1960.
Part
of that time I lived in Louisiana, five years.
Right after I took, came to the Division of
Oceanography as professor of biological
oceanography, I came Director of the Marine
Laboratory at Galveston, and I set it up somewhere
about 1951 or 2, I've forgotten now exactly when. I
had two graduate students down there at that time,
and we were on the campus of the medical school.
They gave us a building down there to do this. but I
didn't stay with that too long. I couldn't get
enough money out of the school to tell the truth
about it. By the school, Texas A&M. Yeah, that's
right it is. The only money was our own projects. In
other words, I was supposed to support the
laboratory from my own projects, which I already
had, which I did for a good while.
But You can't build a laboratory that way. Let me
see if I got this straight. You became professor of
marine biology, I believe you said January 1950.
Yes. Under sort of the pushing or pulling or
whatever of Mr. Jackfield. That's right. He is the
one who organized the department and supervised
the getting of the personnel, the original
personnel. You did that in 50 then, did you first
begin offering courses in oceanography in the
fall of 50? I think they had actually organized
this before I came back in 50. It was organized in
about 49 and they got Dale Leeper from Scripps and
Dr. Price, geologist,
I've forgotten.
Oh yeah, Bob Reed was one of the original
ones, and that's all of it at that time. Okay, and so
for how long, what I'm not clear on is how long did
you teach on campus here?
For the first 10 years, I taught I actually taught
around five years. And then this thing over in
Louisiana got so big that they asked me to come back
and stay over there. So I was still on the campus and
still part of the faculty, but I went back to live
over there. I lived there for five years until
1960. By that time things were centering down
again and
so they offered me then the head of the Department
of Biology. I came back in 1960 and took that over,
but still retained my arrangement on a different
basis with the oil companies. There was no project
as such, but the school, as you know, allows a man to
do a certain amount of consulting work and things
of this sort about two days a month or something
like that. So I had an arrangement, an actual
agreement in writing with about five or six oil
companies to continue this work with them to take
care of their problems. So I continued working
with that problem those problems as they came up
and I'm still doing it today. Only today you can do
it on a more frequent basis. I do it on a more
frequent and intense basis now. At that point
where you, during that five years that you lived in
Louisiana, that five years between 1950 and 60,
had you severed your connections with Texas A&M?
No, I was on the faculty and came back over here
every so often for general checkups and
realignments and things of this sort. But my
project through the Research Foundation, 23,
simply took over my efforts. So you were, while you
were still on the faculty, you weren't actually
teaching any courses? Graduate students. I was
teaching graduate students all that time and took
at least two of them back with me over to Louisiana.
gave them jobs and supervised their theses and
dissertations over there. Do you have any quick
recollection of how many theses and
dissertations came out of Project 23? No, I sure
don't. I do know that I have a number of men in pretty
high positions.
Al Sparks is some sort of a deputy bureaucrat in the
Department of Interior and so on. Jerry Stein is
with the Copley Foundation in California.
I don't remember a lot of others, but I've got them
scattered all over there. Oh yeah, I have two or
three of them are that I had at Grand Isle working
for them and now have PhDs and are in state colleges
here, either in Louisiana or in Texas.
It appeared to me at one point that it was might have
been somewhat odd for you to jump from one
department, say oceanography, over to the head of
another department, biology, but then you've
been always been a biologist. It didn't make any
difference to me whether I was doing biology and
oceanography or biology and biology. It doesn't
make any difference to me whether or not there is a
department at all. You mean any kind of
department? Yeah, that's right, any kind of
department. You were head of the biology
department for what, 11 years? No, I believe
seven. Approximately seven. And about 67, I got to
be 65 years old, I believe it was, and of course you
can't de-head it, after you get to be 65, so I became
a professor of biology at that time. I ran along
until 1970 when I retired.
I mean from the university. As head of the biology
department, did you do any teaching? Yes. I taught
one freshman course the entire period, most of the
period anyway. This was the freshman
invertebrate course. and also taught at one time
or other several graduate courses of various
kinds. The principal of one of these was in the
advanced
field of symbiotics. Symbiotics, the
relationships of organisms as disease and mutual
associations and things of this sort. So I did
teach all of the time. I never at any time had less
than one course at a time. Usually I had two But only
the lecture sections in the freshman course, the
laboratories. These are the type where you have
200 students and you walk in and throw it at them.
Three days a week. That's right. They still have
four hours of lab sometimes. They may have the four
hours in the lab. I presume also you continue to
direct graduate students in the theses and
dissertations? Yes, throughout all of it.
When I quit as head of department, I think I had
about 10 or 12 graduate students at that time.
I began cutting them down about that time, but I
never really got through with all of them until
about two or three years after I retired. Well, I
would think that would be quite a load in itself to
have 10 or 12 graduate students working on
projects. It's supposed to be about three times a
full-time job. I didn't find it that way at all. I
could have taken that many more. Well, I'm sure a
lot depends upon the students you have and the type
of projects on which they're working. And the way
you manage them. Some people can't take one
graduate student to do it right. But it depends on
who you are. Dr. Hopkins, keep track of all of them.
It doesn't make much difference how many he has.